docs: Rewrite docs page on lock file (#5404)
prefix-dev/pixi: docs/workspace/lockfile.md

During the resolution process, it is ensured that resolved versions are compatible with each other.

A lock file lists the exact dependencies that were resolved during this resolution process - the packages, their versions, and other metadata useful for package management.

A lock file improves reproducibility as it means the project environment can easily be recreated on the same machine using this relatively small file.
Whether the lockfile can be recreated on other machines, however, depends on the package manager and whether they have cross platform support.
For example - a common problem encountered is when a package manager installs a package for a specific operating system or CPU architecture that is incompatible with other OSs or hardware.

!!! Warning "Do not edit the lock file"
    A lock file is built for machines, and made human readable for easy inspection. It's not meant to be edited by hand.

## Lock files in Pixi

Pixi - like many other modern package managers - has native support for lock files. This file is named `pixi.lock` .

> During the creation of the lockfile, Pixi resolves the packages - for all environments and platforms listed in the manifest.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During the creation of the lock file, Pixi resolves the packages - for all environments and platforms listed in the manifest.
```

This is also super handy for running code in CI.

The Pixi lock file is also human readable, so you can take a poke around to see which packages are listed - as well as track changes to the file (don't make edits to it - you did read the warning block above right?). 

## Lock file changes

Many Pixi commands will create a lock file if one doesn't already exist, or update it if needed. For example, when you install a package, Pixi goes through the following process:

1. User requests a package to be installed
2. Dependency resolution
3. Generating and writing of lock file
4. Install resulting packages

Additionally - Pixi ensures that the lock file remains in sync with both your manifest, as well as your installed environment.
If it detects that they aren't in sync, it will regenerate the lock file. You can read more about this in the [Lock file satisfiability](#lock-file-satisfiability) section.

The following commands will check and automatically update the lock file if needed:

- `pixi install`
- `pixi run`
- `pixi shell`
- `pixi shell-hook`
- `pixi tree`
- `pixi list`
- `pixi add`

> - `pixi remove`

Reviewer: It would be great to link to their CLI documentation for visibility.

You may be hesitant to commit a "large" file (`pixi.lock` files can be thousands of lines for complex environments), but know that the raw size of this file is still relatively small, and that lock file merges are managed reasonably well by Git.

There is, however, a class of projects where you may not want to commit your lock file as there are other considerations at play.
Namely, this is when developing _libraries_.

---

Libraries have an evolving nature and need to be tested against environments covering a wide range of package versions to ensure compatibility.
This includes an environment with the latest available versions of packages.

### Libraries: Committing the lockfile

If you commit the lock file in your library project, you will want to also consider the following:
- **Upgrading the lockfile:** How often do you want to upgrade the lockfile used by your developers? Do you want to do these upgrades in the main repo history? Do you want to manage this lockfile via (e.g.,) [the Renovate Bot](https://docs.renovatebot.com/modules/manager/pixi/) or via a custom CI job?

> - **Custom CI workflow to test against latest versions:** Do you want to have a workflow to test against the latest dependency versions? If so - you likely want to have the following CI workflow on a cron schedule:

Reviewer 2: This is a really tricky issue -- personally, I lean toward committing the lock file, so all developers are working with the same thing.

Then updating it can be done deliberately, rather than having every dev getting a slightly different environment -- if something breaks, then a (maybe minor contributor) has to deal with it.

I do like having my CI constantly test against the latest versions of everything -- but that's the CI's job, not every developer. I'd do that with a custom CI job the CI can delete the lock file before running tests, for instance. Either every time, or as a special "check for environment updates" job.

You certainly want to do that though -- I've seen projects lock down their deps and then, a year (or more) later find all sorts of issues all at once, that's not what you want!

Now that I think about it, a commit hook that prevented just any commit from updating the lock file would be nice ...

	- Remove the `pixi.lock` before running the `setup-pixi` action
	- Run your tests
	- If the tests fail:
		- See how the generated `pixi.lock` differs from that in `main` by using `pixi-diff` and `pixi-diff-to-markdown`
		- Automatically file an issue so that its tracked in the project repo

You can see how these considerations above have been explored by the following projects:
- Scipy (being explored - will update with PR link once available. [Issue](https://github.com/scipy/scipy/issues/23637))

### Libraries: Git-ignoring the lockfile

If you don't commit the lockfile, you end up with a simplified setup where the lockfile is generated separately for all developers, and for CI.

In CI, you can avoid the need to solve on every workflow run by caching this lockfile so that its shared between CI on the same day by using - for example - the [Parcels-code/pixi-lock](https://github.com/parcels-code/pixi-lock) action.

This simplified setup forgoes reproducibility between machines.

> In both approaches, the test suite is used to determine whether the library is working as expected.

Author: I'm not sure if this is the best way of wording this. What I was trying to get across is that the lock file is less imporant for libraries, and whats more important is a passing test suite for all the environments that I want to test against.

Does that make sense? (and is that conveyed through that sentence?)

## What is a lock file?

To answer this question, we need to highlight the difference between the manifest and the lock file.

The manifest lists the direct dependencies of your project.
When you install your environment, this manifest goes through "dependency resolution": all the dependencies of your requested dependencies are found, et cetera all the way down.
During the resolution process, its ensured that resolved versions are compatible with each other.

A lock file lists the exact dependencies that were resolved during this resolution process - the packages, their versions, and other useful information useful for package management.

A lock file improves reproducibility as it means the project environment can easily be recreated on the same machine using this relatively small file.
Whether the lockfile can be recreated on other machines, however, depends on the package manager and whether they have cross platform support.

> For example - a common problem encountered is when a package manager installs a package for a specific operating system or CPU architecture that is incompatible with other OSs or hardware.

Author: > so I would leave that line out.

This line?
"For example - a common problem encountered is when a package manager installs a package for a specific operating system or CPU architecture that is incompatible with other OSs or hardware."

I'm happy to remove that specific line, though I would like to keep the rest. I think having some notes with how Pixi stacks up with other package manages is very valuable for users learning about Pixi.

The following commands will check and automatically update the lock file if needed:

- `pixi install`
- `pixi run`
- `pixi shell`
- `pixi shell-hook`
- `pixi tree`
- `pixi list`
- `pixi add`
- `pixi remove`

If you want to remove the lock file, you can simply delete it - ready for it to be generated again with the latest package versions when one of the above commands are run.

You may want to have more control over the interplay between the manifest, the lock file, and the created environment. There are additional command line options to help with this:

- `--frozen`: install the environment as defined in the lock file, doesn't update `pixi.lock` if it isn't up-to-date with [manifest file](../reference/pixi_manifest.md). It can also be controlled by the `PIXI_FROZEN` environment variable (example: `PIXI_FROZEN=true`).
- `--locked`: only install if the `pixi.lock` is up-to-date with the [manifest file](../reference/pixi_manifest.md). It can also be controlled by the `PIXI_LOCKED` environment variable (example: `PIXI_LOCKED=true`). Conflicts with `--frozen`.

> ## Committing your lockfile

Author: Done in 7f07c0676e3e5277652878670919f12912d0b269

Reproducibility is very important in a range of projects (e.g., deploying software services, working on research projects, data analysis). Reproducibility of environments helps with reproducibility of results - it ensures your developers, and deployment machines are all using the same packages.

> You may be hesitant to commit a "large" file (`pixi.lock` files can reach over 30,000 lines for complex environments), but know that:

Author: Agreed. Updated to:

> You may be hesitant to commit a "large" file (`pixi.lock` files can be thousands of lines for complex environments), but know that the raw size of this file is still relatively small, and that lock file merges are managed reasonably well by Git.

- this file is only a few megabytes at most
- lock file merges are managed reasonably well by Git 

> 

Author: Can do, will edit

Namely, this is when developing _libraries_.

---

Libraries have an evolving nature and need to be tested against environments covering a wide range of package versions to ensure compatibility.
This includes an environment with the latest available versions of packages.

### Libraries: Committing the lockfile

If you commit the lock file in your library project, you will want to also consider the following:
- **Upgrading the lockfile:** How often do you want to upgrade the lockfile used by your developers? Do you want to do these upgrades in the main repo history?
- **Custom CI workflow to test against latest versions:** Do you want to have a workflow to test against the latest dependency versions? If so - you likely want to have the following CI workflow on a cron schedule:
	- Remove the `pixi.lock` before running the `setup-pixi` action
	- Run your tests
	- If the tests fail:
		- See how the generated `pixi.lock` differs from that in `main` by using `pixi-diff` and `pixi-diff-to-markdown`
		- Automatically file an issue so that its tracked in the project repo

You can see how these considerations above have been explored by the following projects:

> - [Scipy](LINK)

Author: no worries, I updated with 

```
- Scipy (being explored - will update with PR link once available. [Issue](https://github.com/scipy/scipy/issues/23637))

```

so that it can be added later (hope that's ok - just for traceability :) )
